Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Daryl Lane.
For 20 years, Roger Zelazny has been writing science fiction and fantasy.
He tells us why and how he became a science fiction writer.
Well, it's a funny thing.
I was originally a reader of science fiction from about the age of 11 through high school.
And during that period, I did write a lot of science fiction stories, which I tried
to sell, but I was like my early teens.
And I didn't really meet any success at that point.
And I decided actually before that that I wanted to be a writer.
I wasn't necessarily science fiction that I had in mind, though it was science fiction
stories that I was writing during the period I was reading them.
When I went to college, I stopped reading science fiction, just concentrated on the
material I had there.
And I wrote poetry actually, exclusively.
I decided that I was going to start writing again as soon as I got out of college and
had some time.
And at that point, I wasn't absolutely certain what it was that I would try writing, but
when the opportunity finally presented itself in early 1962, I decided it might be easier
for me to break into science fiction since I had read so much of it in the past, knew
the area.
So I decided I'd try there first.
And I went out and re-familiarized myself with science fiction.
And then I began writing and submitting the stories.
And after about six or seven weeks, I sold my first one.
And I sold 16 others that year.
So I stayed with it.
Zelazny has always been recognized as a stylist, a writer to whom craftsmanship is important.
His characters have depth, and his prose is coherent and flexible.
Right.
And that's an important point to make.
Science fiction has traditionally been a field in which style and character were secondary
to plot and idea.
Zelazny's college background in his major field of study, English, may have had some
influence on his writing.
As an undergraduate, I was a psychology major.
And I decided I did not really want to work as a psychologist.
And it occurred to me somewhere along the line that if I'm more simply going to be teaching
and writing with the aim in mind of eventually writing full time, I might as well teach
something that would be a little more fun than psychology.
So I switched to English and took my graduate work in English and comparative literature.
As a result of this background, Zelazny says, his stories had some characteristics not common
to traditional science fiction.
I suppose having grown up on the earlier sort of science fiction, the space opera, sort
of thing of the 30s and 40s too, and the harder science stories of the 40s and some of the
sociological science fiction of the 50s, and having a background in literature, I, there's
a natural tendency, whether it's conscious or not, to want to do something different
than things that had gone before.
As a consequence, my stories, well the first ones were basically gimmick stories because
it was the easiest way to break in.
It was about all that I was capable of doing at the time.
But when I began writing at greater length and when I was a bit sure of myself, I would
think of the characters first.
First, so the stories tended to have more, I suppose, in the way of psychological motivation
rather than just external characterization.
And my writing itself, possibly because of the years I spent writing poetry and reading
general literature, tended to be a bit different from some of the earlier things which were
kind of journalistic in character.
More next time about Roger Zelazny.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Daryl Lane.
Science Fiction authors sometimes write fantasy, and fantasy authors sometimes write science
fiction.
Roger Zelazny writes both.
He talks about the differences between the two forms.
I do make the distinction myself.
In a science fiction story, everything I feel should be explainable in terms of natural
laws, or extensions of natural laws as we understand them now.
Whereas in a fantasy story, it's part of the rules of the game, so I feel there are
no compunctions against invoking the supernatural or bringing in magic and things of that sort.
And so basically a science fiction story, things are ultimately explainable in a fantasy
story.
They're explainable really in terms of something that isn't explainable.
So you've got more, you've got the less rational background if you push things far
enough in a fantasy story.
So Zelazny says he writes some of his books so that they can be read either way.
I also believe in mixing the two.
Lord of Light, for instance, was a book where I intentionally wrote it to be taken two ways
of fantasy.
A fan could read it as a piece of fantasy, whereas a science fiction fan also had options
available to him.
Any single item which occurs in there, which is of an unusual nature, is that there's
ultimately an explanation available for it if the person cares to use it.
If he doesn't, that's fine too.
Zelazny makes an interesting point about science fiction.
He says that sometimes a science fiction story will become a fantasy story after a certain amount of time.
And he uses one of his own stories, A Rose for Ecclesiastes, as an example.
It's kind of funny too because I think the first story for which I became known was a piece called A Rose for Ecclesiastes.
One of my reasons in writing this is because I was very fond of the earlier space operas and things like this,
where they played John Carter of Mars.
And I had always wanted to do something set on the Mars, which existed in these earlier stories.
And I knew at the time I wrote it that it was scientifically impossible at that point.
We already knew enough about Mars to know that the temperature was not the same as I had it in the story,
that the atmosphere was not the same and so forth.
But it was close enough to the point where this knowledge was just becoming current,
that I could still get away with doing a thing like that.
So I intentionally wrote that and wrote it in the fashion I did.
I was a kind of exercise and nostalgia on my part.
I always wanted to do a story set on that kind of Mars.
And I knew that if I waited another year or so I wouldn't be able to.
The same with Venus for my story, the doors of his face, the lamps of his mouth.
At that point we already were aware that the surface temperature was about 900 degrees,
but still there was this whole traditional body of science fiction literature,
which had a vast, watery world, misty and so forth.
I really had wanted to use at least once in my life, so I did those two stories
as a kind of tribute to the earlier things.
But then again I wrote them the way I was writing them rather than in the older style.
So reading them now they'd have to be regarded as fantasy rather than science fiction
because science has already demonstrated that those circumstances don't prevail.
More on Roger Zelazny tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson.
And Darrell Lane.
Many science fiction and fantasy authors these days write novels and series
in three, four and sometimes five book sets.
Jack Shocker's Well World series or Elizabeth Lynn's trilogy The Chronicles of Tornor
are two good examples.
It's a commercially attractive idea for one thing.
If readers like the first book, then there's a ready-made market for the following ones.
And of course it also allows an author the scope to pursue a theme in greater depth and length
than a single book would allow.
And the extra depth can give an epic quality to the series.
One of the best of the series is a set of five books by Roger Zelazny,
a science fantasy adventure called simply The Amber Series.
The first volume is entitled Nine Princes and Amber, and it was published in 1971.
The other four, The Guns of Avalon, Sign of the Unicorn, The Hand of Oberon, and the Courts of Chaos.
Zelazny calls the book Something Beside Science Fantasy.
Whenever I try anything of this sort, I try to give it an extra twist is what it is.
Basically, I look at it myself as a kind of heroic fantasy with a few variations that don't usually occur in that sort of literature.
One of the variations Zelazny develops in the books is what's called the pattern.
It is a kind of archetypal design which exists in the real world,
amber of which our own earth and a great variety of shadings and variations thereof exist.
Amber is the real world earth and the others are referred to as shadow.
Our shadow in the story is the background, the basis of reality in amber is this design called the pattern,
which was inscribed by an ancestor of the clan about whom the story is told.
Only a person of the blood of the royal family of amber is able to walk this pattern and not be destroyed by it.
And in the course of walking the pattern at some point in his early life,
amberite acquires the ability to walk through the various shadow worlds,
which surround amber so that he can travel through an infinity of possibilities to virtually any world he desires.
The basic plot of the series consists of a struggle for the throne of amber,
and in the process our earth is threatened with destruction since we are only a shadow of the real world of amber.
In the struggle the main character Corwin keeps traveling between our earth and amber.
Technology doesn't work in amber so the people there fight with swords and magic.
For this reason the books are called science fantasy or as Zelazny said, heroic fantasy.
They've been very popular too. Zelazny says the readers have responded enthusiastically.
I have gotten more fan letters on the amber books than anything else I've ever written.
There was a period of a couple of years there where I was getting several letters a week on the amber books.
The narrative was concluded with an exciting climax in the fifth book, The Courts of Chaos.
Because of the wide reader response though, and because there were some unanswered questions in that last book,
a sixth novel on amber is a possibility.
There is possibly a sixth one. I have made no commitments. I do not have a plot,
but I've been talking about it and thinking about it, publisher.
It is possible when I get a few things out of the way that I'm writing now that I might go on into a sixth one.
But so far as the five books that now exist are concerned, that story is told.
That was the story I had in mind. Anything which would continue, the series would probably take off in a new direction.
It could possibly be from another character's point of view.
More about Roger Zelazny next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson.
One of the more interesting time travel books in recent years is Roadmarks by Roger Zelazny.
Though time travel is one of the traditional science fiction themes,
Zelazny doesn't often write that type of story.
I have always attempted to avoid time travel stories because I don't like the paradoxes involved.
In fact, the only thing I can think of that I had done in the past was a short story called Divine Madness.
I said that I really wouldn't write a time travel story unless I came up with a new gimmick.
For Roadmarks, I thought I had something in the image of time considered as a superhighway.
Without the paradoxes, in an Everett Wheeler parallel world situation,
it was really the image of the road that fascinated me and led to my writing that particular book.
Time is conceived as a superhighway in Roadmarks, with the exits leading to different eras throughout time.
Zelazny has an interesting story to tell regarding the origin of the idea behind Roadmarks.
I got the idea for that book here in New Mexico really one Sunday.
I was just out for a drive and I-25, which was a nice highway type road,
took a turn off and drove for a few minutes.
The road rapidly degenerated until, with a matter of minutes, I was on a dirt road
and I passed through a place that I couldn't even find on the map.
It was a little village where there was a horse pulling a wagon and no overhead electrical lines in sight.
It was almost as if I had driven back through time into the 19th century.
There were log buildings and somewhere around there something started to click.
As I drove back again on the road and improved until finally I was on the superhighway,
I started working out just the mechanisms for the idea of driving through time, which I used in Roadmarks.
Actually by the time I got home I had a number of the situations worked out and I sat down and began writing it.
The protagonist is a man named Red Dorokin.
He travels up and down this highway of time in a battered old pickup.
And when he's not trying to avoid and outwit some assassins who are after him,
he's running guns to the Greeks back in the past at Marathon.
And there's something else in the book that's a recurring motif or symbol,
huge dragons that float above the road occasionally.
Their function is not clear, but they seem to have some responsibility for the road.
They were simply to represent the dark forces, which I tend to bring in any fantasy novel.
In a story like this, there has to be a point where you have to ultimately reach something that's basically unexplainable.
Namely, where did the road come from and how did it come to function, the way that it did.
And in making a decision on that, I could go either way.
I could find some science fiction trappings and explain it,
or I could leave it intentionally, something shadowy and with a more fantasy background.
If I did that, I decided I needed some symbol to invoke as an ultimate creator of the road,
hence the dragons, and then they're tie-in with Red.
Roadmarks published in 1981 is a different sort of time travel story,
tending toward the fantasy rather than the science fiction end of the spectrum.
And since Roger Zelazny is responsible for it, it's highly enjoyable.
And we'll have more on Roger Zelazny on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Darrell Lane.
And David Carson.
Writer Roger Zelazny has won numerous awards in the field of science fiction and fantasy,
and he's been writing it for some 20 years.
Zelazny has a scholarly background which often shows up in his books.
The way he uses mythology, for instance, in novels like Lord of Light or This Immortal,
or Psychology and the Dream Masters.
He has a master's degree in literature and his knowledge of history is extensive.
He's read deeply in the mythologies and early literature of mankind,
and he also reads a great deal of modern literature, both science fiction and otherwise.
He has some interesting ideas on science fiction and fantasy,
and it's placed in the modern world.
Science fiction is a special genre to him for a few basic reasons.
It is, for one reason, one of the few special places where you still deal with characters
other than those which occur in the modern, realistic or naturalistic novel.
Going back to the critic, Northrop Fry, who spoke of characters in various modes.
Science fiction is one of the few places outside of modern poetry
where a writer can deal with characters in what he called the Chaimimetic or the Mythic modes.
That is, characters who are greater than their fellow man, or characters who are godlike.
Sometimes in that science fiction does deal with mutants and aliens and sentient computers
and cyborgs and robots.
What have you, just old categories of beings which are different than the characters you meet with
in a naturalistic or realistic novel.
So in that sense, and I think this is one of the great virtues of science fiction,
it gives the writer more scope for exploration in terms of character.
Science fiction is one of the few places where you can deal with characters in a naturalistic or realistic way.
Besides the freedom or scope that science fiction provides for a writer,
it also has one other quality that Zelazny feels differentiates it from general or mainstream literature.
I think that science fiction is still basically for all of the experimentation that went on in the 60s,
a bastion of storytelling.
The idea is not necessarily the hero anymore as it was in the days Kingsley Amos referred to it as being such back in the 40s and perhaps the 50s,
but we have real characters now and ideas are handled in a more sophisticated fashion.
The writing has also improved from a stylistic standpoint,
but basically I think if you looked at the area,
well even statistically, there are more examples of straightforward storytelling in science fiction
than you might find in general fiction at large.
So that is another reason I am very fond of science fiction because I am basically a storyteller
no matter what I do with mythology or writing devices.
Does Zelazny think science fiction will ever merge with general literature and gain a wider acceptance?
I don't think it will necessarily be merged with the mainstream and I also do not think that this is necessarily a bad thing at all.
It was Santayana who said that about something else entirely,
but which I think is Aparapro, to attempt to give such things a wide currency is to be willing to denature them in order to boast that they have been propagated.
I think science fiction will always have its devotees and that they will grow in number just as the population itself increases,
but I don't know that the percentage is ever going to increase that greatly.
The chances are pretty good that science fiction has at least a few more readers and fans than it would have had had Zelazny not taking it up.
His works stand as an advertisement for the quality and value of good science fiction.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you for watching!